

SPCONV(1)                  Unix Programmer's Manual                  SPCONV(1)


NAME

     spconv - Convert snapshot files (.SNA, .SP, .Z80,  .PRG,  .ACH,  .ZX  and
     RAW)


DISCLAIMER

     This programs are Public Domain, and because of that I will not be liable
     for any damages resulting from use of this software.


SYNOPSIS

     spconv <infile.EXT> <.EXT>
     spconv <infile.EXT> <outfile.EXT>


DESCRIPTION

     Spconv is a utility to convert between various snapshot formats. Snapshot
     files  are created by various spectrum emulators. SPCONV converts between
     .SNA, .SP, .Z80, .PRG, .ACH and .ZX files.

     Wildcards for the infile or outfile parameters are not accepted, an error
     message  is  displayed  if  either  *  or  ?  is found in one or both the
     filenames. The outfile parameter is either a full filename  or  only  the
     suffix  .SNA,  .SP, .Z80, .PRG, .ACH or .ZX. The prefix is taken from the
     first parameter in that case.

     Normaly the <infile> and <outfile> are not of the same type. If they  are
     you will get a error message. This is so unless both files are of the .SP
     or .Z80 type. In case of .SP format the converter  will  convert  an  old
     style .SP file to a new style .SP file or from a new style .SP file to an
     old style .SP file, depending on the input. The old  style  .SP  file  is
     used  by VGASPEC, with seems to be an unauthorised version of the spanish
     "SPECTRUM" program. The "SPECTRUM" program will use  the  new  style  .SP
     files.

     In case both files are of the .Z80 format spconv will read the .Z80  file
     and will output a .Z80 file in the version 1.45 .Z80 format. This enables
     conversion of normal 48K Spectrum files made by Z80 version 2.01  or  3.0
     to  the  older format so they can be loaded in a version 1.45 Z80 or 2.01
     Z80 emulator. Of course additional information that can only be stored in
     the  version  2.01  and 3.0 files is lost. Therefore spconv will check if
     the .Z80 file is for a 48K Spectrum and check if the Interface-1 rom  was
     not  paged  in.  If  the  check  fails  an error message is given and the
     conversion is terminated - no output will be produced. Spconv  will  only
     output  version  1.45  .Z80 files since these are compatible with old and
     new Z80-emulator versions. If Spconv encounters a .Z80 format  file  that
     seems  to  be  newer  than version 3.0, Spconv will attempt to convert it
     anyway in the hope that it is upwards compatible. A warning will ge given
     in that case.





                               31th May, 1995                                1



SPCONV(1)                  Unix Programmer's Manual                  SPCONV(1)


CONVERSION NOTES

     [.SP files - Used by the Spanish "SPECTRUM" and "VGASPEC" programs.]

     Conversion to/from .SP files may not always work. It is not clear  to  me
     how  IFF,  IFF2  and the interrupt mode are stored in the .SP file. Since
     version 1.02 I have made some improvements to  this  type  of  conversion
     however,  it  sould  work now, but I have not enough .SP samples to fully
     test it. Note that crashing of a converted image may also  be  caused  by
     bugs  in  the SPECTRUM emulator. Conversion to .SP will work if the image
     is converted from a RAW image (see later).

     [.Z80 files - Used by the Dutch  "Z80"  programs.  This  format  is  also
     usable for 128K Spectrum images.]

     [.SNA files - Used by the  Norwegian  "JPP"  PC-program;  the  "Spectrum"
     program  for  the Amiga; the "XZX" X-Windows program and a lot more. This
     is the most  supported  format  since  it  originated  from  the  Mirage-
     Microdirver format.]

     Conversion between .SNA and .Z80 and from  .Z80  to  .SNA  should  be  no
     problem,  both formats are sufficiently described in the documentation of
     JPP (the norwegian emulator) and Z80 (the dutch emulator).

     [.PRG files are loaded by a PC-emulator from Ireland. This  emulator  can
     not save in this format.]

     Conversion to/from .PRG files should work  fine  also.  I  don't  have  a
     description  of  that format, but I think I figured it all out by looking
     at some samples. I only don't know where the border colour is stored. The
     specem  emulator  (an Irish emulator) doesn't show the border, so I can't
     find out by trail and error.

     [.ACH files are  used  on  Archimeds  computers  by  an  emulator  called
     "Speculator" or "!Speccy"]

     Since  version  1.07  Conversion  should  work  without   problems.   The
     conversion  is  patterned after a program (also called Spconv) and a BBC-
     Basic program from John Veness (supplied to me by Mike Borcherds). I also
     got a .ACH file snapped just after startup which was most helpfull. Since
     the programs I got were written independently but had  all  registers  at
     the  same place (but one got her accent registers swapped with the normal
     registers), I think it is pritty  save  to  assume  that  the  format  is
     correct now. The previous version of this converter got register 'I' from
     the wrong spot, and more important, I forgot to set  the  interrupt  mode
     when converting to .ACH file format.

     It is also tested now with a fair collection of snaps. The .ACH extension
     is  my  own invention to cope with the MS-DOS naming conventions. I named
     them this way because the samples I had ended in ".archimedes" and use of
     .ARC  as  extension  didn't  sound  like  a  good  idea.  I don't have an
     archimedes computer to test it but somebody else (Adrian Jackson) did  it
     for me. For proper conversion you need the spectrum rom because that is a
     part of the archimedes image (don't blame me).  The  ROM  must  be  named
     'spectrum.rom'  and  be  located  in the working directory or in the same
     directory as spconv.exe. If no ROM is found  the  converter  will  insert


                               31th May, 1995                                2



SPCONV(1)                  Unix Programmer's Manual                  SPCONV(1)


     NULL bytes.

     [.ZX files are used by the KGB emulator on a Commodore Amiga]

     Conversion to/from .ZX files should  work,  Peter  McGavin  send  me  the
     definition  of  the format as used in the KGB emulator. I implemtented it
     that way but I don't have an Amiga with a KGB emulator so it is untested!
     I  previously  used  the  information about the format of the file from a
     VAX-Basic program supplied to me by  Jason  Brown  and  most  information
     correlated  so  I'm hopefull that it works. Please send me feetback if it
     works so I can put it here in the documentation. Oh, before I forget, the
     .ZX  format contains the last 132 bytes of the spectrum rom (don't ask me
     why) so spconv will look for "spectrum.rom" in the working  directory  or
     in the same directory as spconv.exe is located.  If absent than the first
     132 bytes will be NULL bytes.

     [RAW files are created by saving the whole ram on a real spectrum to  the
     RS232 port of Interface-1 from basic]

     Spconv can also be used to convert a raw spectrum  image  to  a  snapshot
     file.  The  image  has  to  be  captured  with via the RS232 connetion on
     Interface-1.  Some tools to do this are in an archive called "SPEC232". A
     program  called  "SLOAD"  will  read from the RS232 link to a file on the
     MSDOS-PC. At the Spectrum side the the command

     SAVE *"b"CODE 16384,49152

     HAS to be used. Spconv will convert the file is such  way  that  it  will
     continue in the basic interpreter after the snapshot is loaded. so

     SAVE *"b"CODE 16384,49152:PRINT Hello, World!

     will after conversion to a snapshot file and loading it in  the  emulator
     begin  with printing "Hello, World!". A description how to wire the RS232
     cable is also in the "SPEC232" package.


EXAMPLES

     Converting a .SNA JPP file to the .Z80 Dutch emulator:   spconv  game.sna
     game.z80 or spconv game.sna .z80


DIAGNOSTICS

     0 - OK: The program finished without problems

     1 - USAGE:  The program was called incorrectly:

     -    Wrong number of parameters

     -    Wildcards on the command-line

     -    Input and output are of the same type (not for .SP and .Z80)




                               31th May, 1995                                3



SPCONV(1)                  Unix Programmer's Manual                  SPCONV(1)


     2 - READ_ERROR:  There was a problem while reading the input file:

     -    Error while reading the input file

     -    Error while fseeking the input file

     3 - WRITE_ERROR: There was a problem while creating the output file:

     -    Error while writing the output file

     -    Error with opening/reading the spectrum.rom needed  for  the  output
          file.

     4 - FILE_ERROR:  There was a  problem  with  the  input  or  output  file
     format:

     -    Input file does not exist

     -    Type of input or output file not known

     -    Input file is:

     +    A newer version of an existing type

     +    Corrupt

     +    Not in the expected format (RAW and new .SP types)

     +    Not a 48K spectrum file (in .Z80 files)

     -    Input file snapshot was taken while the interface-1 was paged in (in
          .Z80  files).  The  other  file  formats  can  not  cope  with  this
          (including the version 1.45 .Z80 files).

     -    Undocumented page number in .Z80 files (file corrupt).

     -    Decompression of .Z80 file failed (file corrupt).


PORTABILITY

     The program should be portable. Assumptions about endian-ness are avoided
     and  I  ensured  clean  compilation with Turbo-C++ 1.0 (with all warnings
     enabled).  Chris Wells used this command line of GCC on this program (and
     gave feetback until it gave a clean compile):

     gcc -ansi -pedantic -Wall -Wwrite-strings -Wshadow -Wformat
     -Wpointer-arith -Wconversion -Wstrict-prototypes
     -Wmissing-prototypes -o spconv spconv.c


     I also ensured that the identifiers used in the program are uniq  in  the
     first  8  characters.  I  don't  expect  much problems when compiling the
     program with other compilers. The code does make assumptions  about  path
     names.   Using  the  program on a VAX will give problems with recognizing
     directories e.t.c. especially for finding "spectrum.rom", I leave  a  fix


                               31th May, 1995                                4



SPCONV(1)                  Unix Programmer's Manual                  SPCONV(1)


     for this as an exercise...


BUGS

     Conversion to/from .SP files may not always work.


THANKS TO

     Thanks  for  suppling  information  and  for  creating   these   spectrum
     emulators:
     Arnt Gulbrandsen (author of JPP)
     Ramco v.d. Woestijne (supplied new .SP format);
     Gerton A. Lunter (author of Z80);
     Pedro Gimeno (author of SPECTRUM);
     Kevin J Phair (author of SPECEM);
     Mike Borcherds (suppied the archimedes file format);
     Jason Brown (suppied the initial KGB file format);
     Peter McGavin (suppied the complete KGB file format);
     John Veness (reverse engineerd the ACH file format);
     Adrian Jackson (send me a near perfect .SNA to .ACH converter);
     Chris Wells (ran the program through GCC in pedantic  mode  and  supplied
     the UNIX man page and Makefile).


































                               31th May, 1995                                5

